CHAPTER XIX
And there came two angels to Sodom at even, and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom, and Lot,
seeing them, rose up to meet them, and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground,
and he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and
tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways.
And they said, Nay, but we will abide in the street all night.
And he pressed upon them greatly, and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house,
and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.
But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house
round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter, and they called unto Lot
and said unto him, Where are the men which came into thee this night?
Bring them out unto us, that we may know them.
And Lot went out the door unto them, and shut the door after him, and said, I pray you,
brethren, do not so wickedly.
Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man.
Let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes,
only unto these men do nothing, for therefore came they unto the shadow of my roof.
And they said, Stand back.
And they said again, This one fellow came into Sojourn, and he will needs be a judge.
Now will we deal worse with thee than with them.
And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.
But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut, too,
the door.
And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and
great, so that they wearied themselves to find the door.
And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides?
Sons-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring
them out of this place.
For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is wax and great, before the face
of the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it.
And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons-in-law, which married his daughters, and said, Up,
get you out of this place, for the Lord will destroy the city.
But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons-in-law.
And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife
which are here, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and
upon the hand of his two daughters, the Lord being merciful unto him, and they brought
him forth, and set him without the city.
And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for
Look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain.
Escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.
And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my lord.
Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy,
which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life, and I cannot escape to the mountain,
lest some evil take me, and I die.
Behold thou, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one.
Oh, let me escape thither, is it not a little one, and my soul shall live.
And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will
not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.
Haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do anything till thou become thither.
Therefore the name of the city was called Zohar.
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zohar.
Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven,
and he overthrew those cities and all the plain and all the inhabitants of the cities
and that which grew upon the ground.
But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
And Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord,
and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah and toward all the land of the plain,
and beheld and lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham
and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.
And Lot went up out of Zohar and dwelt in the mountain and his two daughters with him,
for he feared to dwell in Zohar, and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the
earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth.
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve
seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night, and the firstborn went in and lay with
her father, and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
And it came to pass on the morrow that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I
lay yesternight with my father, let us make him drink wine this night also, and go thou
in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night also, and the younger arose and lay
with him, and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.
And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab, the same as the father of the Moabites
unto this day.
And the younger she also bare a son, and called his name Benamai, the same as the father of
the children of Ammon unto this day.
CHAPTER XX An Abraham journeyed from thence toward the
south country, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Girar.
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister, and Abimelek king of Girar sent,
and took Sarah.
But God came to Abimelek in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold thou art but a dead
man, for the woman which thou hast taken, for she is a man's wife.
But Abimelek had not come near her, and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous
nation?
Said he not unto me, She is my sister, and she, even she herself, said, He is my brother.
In the integrity of my heart, in the innocency of my hands, have I done this.
And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy
heart, for I also withheld thee from sinning against me.
Therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.
Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee,
and thou shalt live.
And if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou and all that are
thine.
Therefore Abimelek rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all
these things in their ears, and the men were sore afraid.
Then Abimelek called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us?
And what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
Thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
And Abimelek said unto Abraham, What sawest thou that thou hast done this thing?
And Abraham said, Because I thought surely the fear of God is not in this place, and
they will slay me for my wife's sake.
And yet indeed she is my sister, she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter
of my mother, and she became my wife.
And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said
unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt show unto me, and every place whither
we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.
And Abimelek took sheep, and oxen, and men's servants, and women's servants, and gave them
unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.
And Abimelek said, Behold, my land is before thee, dwell where it pleaseth thee.
And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver, behold,
he is to thee a covering of the eyes unto all that are with thee and with all other.
Thus she was reproved.
So Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelek, and his wife, and his maid-servants,
and they bear children.
For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelek because of Sarah,
Abraham's wife.
CHAPTER XXI
And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.
For Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God
had spoken to him.
And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him,
Isaac.
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.
And Abraham was an hundred years old when his son Isaac was born unto him.
And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.
And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham that Sarah should have given children suck,
for I have borne him a son in his old age?
And the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac
was weaned.
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar, the Egyptian, which she had borne unto Abraham, mocking.
Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son, for the son of
this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.
And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son.
And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad and because
of thy bondwoman, in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice.
For in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning and took bread and a bottle of water and gave
it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away.
And she departed and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
And she went and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bow-shot,
for she said, Let me not see the death of the child.
And she sat over against him and lifted up her voice and wept.
And God heard the voice of the lad, and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven
and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar?
Fear not, for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.
Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand, for I will make him a great nation.
And God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water, and she went and filled the bottle
with water and gave the lad drink.
And God was with the lad, and he grew and dwelt in the wilderness and became an archer.
And he dwelt in the wilderness of Peran, and his mother took him a wife out of the land
of Egypt.
And it came to pass at that time that Abimlek and Phicol, the chief captain of his host,
spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest.
Thou therefore swear unto me hereby God, that thou will not deal falsely with me, nor with
my son, nor with my son's son, but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
And Abraham said, I will swear.
And Abraham reproved Abimlek because of a well of water which Abimlek's servants had
violently taken away.
And Abimlek said, I want not who hath done this thing, neither didst thou tell me, neither
yet heard I of it, but to-day.
And Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them unto Abimlek, and both of them made a covenant.
And Abraham set seven eulams of the flock by themselves.
And Abimlek said unto Abraham, What mean these seven eulams which thou hast set by themselves?
And he said, For these seven eulams shalt thou take of my hand that they may be a witness
unto me that I have digged this well.
Wherefore he called that place Beersheba, because there they swear both of them.
Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba, then Abimlek rose up, and Phicol the chief captain
of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.
And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord the
everlasting God.
And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines land many days.
CHAPTER XXII
And it came to pass after these things that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him Abraham,
And he said, Behold, here I am.
And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee
into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains
which I will tell thee of.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young
men with him, and Isaac his son, and claved the wood for the burnt offering, and rose
up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.
Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.
And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass, and I and the lad will
go yonder and worship, and come again to you.
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son, and he took
the fire in his hand and a knife, and they went both of them together.
And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father, and he said, Here am I, my
son.
And he said, Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering.
So they went both of them together.
And they came to the place which God had told him of, and Abraham built an altar there,
and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the
wood.
And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.
And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham!
And he said, Here am I.
And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him, for now
I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son,
from me.
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold, behind him a ram caught in a thicket
by his horns.
And Abraham went, and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering, in the stead
of his son.
And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah Jireh, as it is said to this day,
In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.
And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time, and said, By
myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld
thy son, thine only son, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the seashore,
and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies, and in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice.
So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba,
and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
And it came to pass, after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milka,
she hath also borne children unto thy brother Nahor, whose his first-born, and Boz his brother,
and Chemuel the father of Aram, and Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaf, and Bethuel.
And Bethuel begat Rebekah. These eight Milka did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
And his concubine, whose name was Ruma, she bore also Tiba, and Gaham, and Thehash, and
Meika.
CHAPTER XXIII
And Sarah was one hundred and seven and twenty years old. These were the years of the life
of Sarah.
And Sarah died in Kirjath Arba, the same as Hebron in the land of Canaan. And Abraham came
to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying, I
am a stranger and a sojourner with you. Give me a possession of a burying place with you,
that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, Hear us, my lord, thou art
a mighty prince among us. In the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead. None of us shall
withhold from thee his sepulcher, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.
And Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children
of Heth. And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead
out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for me, to Ephraim the son of Zohar, that he may
give me the cave of Machpila, which he hath, which is in the end of his field. For as much
money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a burying place amongst you.
And Ephraim dwelt among the children of Heth, and Ephraim the Hittite answered Abraham in
the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city,
saying, Nay, my lord, hear me. The field give I thee, and the cave that is therein I give
thee, in the presence of the sons of my people give I thee, bury thy dead.
And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land, and he spake unto Ephraim
in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee,
hear me, I will give thee money for the field, take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.
And Ephraim answered Abraham, saying unto him, My lord, hearken unto me. The land is
worth four hundred shekels of silver. What is that betwixt me and thee? Bury therefore
thy dead.
And Abraham hearkened unto Ephraim, and Abraham weighed to Ephraim the silver which he had
named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money
with the merchant.
And the field of Ephraim, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamrie, the field and the
cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the
borders round about, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children
of Heth before all that went in at the gate of his city.
And after this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah, before
Mamrie, the same as Hebron in the land of Canaan. And the field and the cave that is
therein were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a burying place by the sons
of Heth.